In London, Martin Amies and myself live really not more than a few hundred yards away.
So he is the laureate of this part of London where we both live.
And I recognize what he writes about very well and enjoy it very much.
I like his humor.
his vitality, his originality, and I've read all his books.
No kidding.
And I'm a fan of this.
I've just done a tiny little piece on the information for a magazine in England.
This is one instance, I think, and I don't want to talk about him at any rate.
No, no.
Well, you can get him to talk about me, of course.
I will.
There's one instance where there's...
All the hype notwithstanding, the book is good.
Oh, yes.
He's a real writer.
He's got real originality.
You get all his stuff, and then you read the book, and it's a disappointment.
Well, what he's got, his intelligence is rooted in comedy.
He is a real comic writer, which is not to say there's not a great deal of tragedy.
There's not black comedy.
And I like, personally, because I think I've tried to some extent in nonfiction to do, also to write from the comic base,
I think that is the only way successfully to deal with a good deal in the 20th century.
And since, as I say, he lives very close to me, I recognize what he is describing, I wouldn't quite call it describing, sending up almost, exalting him, exhilarating him.
I recognize it very well.
Tell me, this is... Yes, back to... But let's
Why is it that you went back to this work?
Tell me about that.
Yes, it's nearly 30 years, pretty well 30 years since I first wrote Lit and Straight View.
And when I wrote it, many people who were in the book were still alive.
And in a way, that was a great advantage.
I could go and see them.
I could speak to them, interview them, as you're interviewing me.
I get a sense of them.
And I met Oswald Sidville, Bertrand Russell, Ian Forster.
people who are, to some extent, legendary characters now.
And that was, as I say, a great advantage.
But there was a disadvantage as well.
It curtailed your freedom to write about living people.
And there was something else.
They were old people, and they had difficulty if I asked them, where are the letters, where is this correspondence?
They couldn't always find it, or perhaps they didn't wish to show it to you.
Well, of course, now they are all dead, but the letters and so on,
and diaries sometimes, are available.
They are in public collections, sometimes in this country.
So I have both the advantage of meeting a number of these people and also seeing what was written to them, by them, and about them.
So that is one thing.
A great deal of information
that was not available when I first wrote this in the 60s has become available.
And there's one other thing.
The world has changed in 30 years.
And so I have brought the book up to date in a different way, which is to see the past from a different angle and a different distance.
And I hope to give Strachey and the Bloomsburg group generally
a topical, a modern relevance.
It was a book of the sixties, very much, I think.
I hope it's now a book of the nineties.
So do you think that that book was involved a lot of journalism in some respect, in terms of, I don't mean writing for periodicals and newspapers, but when you think of the techniques of journalism, you think writing right now involves more perspective and
What I've tried to do is get the best of both worlds, of course, to give it historical perspective and topical relevance.
The point about Strachey is that he didn't treat human beings as mere symptoms of the past.
He thought that the past existed in all of us.
We were the product of the past, and it was a living thing in us.
And if we could analyze it and describe it, we would understand the course of the journey we were on.
I've tried to continue that work.
But my sense is that this has also been a burning thing with you.
I mean, did you feel perhaps that maybe you didn't do the... Yes, I didn't do it.
I didn't do it justice the first time.
I was extremely young.
I came to this book when I was still in my twenties.
And although there are advantages...
in that.
There are also disadvantages.
It seems to me that it all came fresh to me.
It was part of my education.
The whole of the Bloomsbury world, I felt like an archaeologist digging out a past and being amazed at what I discovered.
But I perhaps lacked some sophistication.
What I want to try and do
is to combine the best of that sort of freshness that I had before with perhaps more technical know-how today and try and retain what is fresh and was fresh and vivid, I hope, and was alive in the previous book, even if it wasn't done as I do it now.
There have been pages from the first version where I've said, look, I can do that better.
My God, I know more than that.
And I've said about it.
And at the end of the day, I thought, well, I'll keep what I did.
Because it had some sort of irregular beat of life to it.
And although I now may put it in a more scholarly way or a more sophisticated way, perhaps it's more embalmed.
So in those cases, I have kept what the young self did.
I think an adjective you didn't include in what you might add in a more mature way, too.
I, for one, prefer biographies written by mature people.
I just think that the skills and the knowledge and everything that comes with living
Yes, I was eventually embarrassed by part of my youthful work.
I didn't want to say that.
I was in part embarrassed, as I think perhaps if I showed you perhaps some of the letters you wrote in your teens or twenties, you might... Well, let me just say Bob Carroll, who's, you know, you're working on the St.
Johnson thing, and I did a master's thesis track in the 60s when I was a kid, and Bobby Baker, who was... And Bob said, geez, that might have some stuff that I can use.
Yeah.
So meanwhile I went and I read this thesis, which I thought was wonderful.
Jesus Christ.
Exactly, exactly.
You're just a little embarrassed a little bit.
Indeed, that's exactly how I felt.
It's not that everything was rotten.
No, no, but the information is wonderful.
And also there's this, that there's a tendency when you're young, or at least when I was young, for me to use three adjectives.
where none would do.
Perfectly well, as if we're all one.
To overload, to think, well, they may not understand that I know this, and to put it in.
What I think I'll say on the purpose, the miracle that I'm hoping to achieve in this book is to make it a less long book and to have much more in it.
Was the first book large in it?
Believe you me, it was.
It was two volumes together.
And it got very good.
because there was a shock element in it.
People hadn't quite revealed as much of personal life.
But it got, you know, the New York Times Book Review made it one of their ten books at the end of the year.
I can't remember what the Boston Globe did here, but I remember the New York Review of Books, and so I gave it a really good review.
George Steiner in the New Yorker, you know, gave it the lead.
So I was very fortunate.
But there are some people, Arthur Schlesinger, who hated it.
You see, you may not trespass into people's private lives and do it in this way.
This young chap going here, there, exposing this, saying that, entering a room where you haven't been invited into dinner and sitting down and dining, you know?
This is bad manners.
So have things changed?
I'd be very interested to see.
Have your perceptions changed?
Have your judgments changed?
Any of them?
Is it a different book?
Yes, there are some things that are different.
I see Strachey himself as being less a sort of hippie figure that he wasn't, the progenitor of flower power and all that, and make love not war.
I see him as a more subversive and challenging figure now.
I think that what he tried to do is to investigate human nature in a way, which is to say...
Lots of strange behavior, deviant behavior, unorthodox behavior, has been going on throughout history and is part of our heritage.
And that's a very strange thing.
So when he wrote about Elizabethan times or Victorian times, he stripped away a certain respectability and showed us quite discreetly how indiscreet they were.
So there are two levels.
Do you think perhaps you were a bit odd...
by the subject yes I think I was I think the point is the everything was unpublished I came across this extraordinary archive in cellars and attics of people's houses and I was overwhelmed a bit by it it dictated to me now I hope there's a more even collaboration between me and the material and indeed some of the new material which I didn't see um
Do you suggest that people read the two books?
I think they read this book.
I can spare them.
You'd like them not to read the first book?
Yes, I would, except for somebody who's a sort of textual scholar or something like that.
I would prefer all libraries to get rid of the first edition and to get this.
It is a better book, and there's nothing...
that was in the first book that isn't in this.
And there's a good deal more, as I say.
And I hope done with greater sight of it.
Were there any misjudgments that you're acknowledging now?
Yes.
I mean, I sometimes got the order of things wrong, and therefore certain things seemed to be as a consequence.
And in fact, they were a cause and not a consequence.
Bloomsbury went in a lot for three-cornered relationships.
I had two sides of the correspondence before.
Now I've got the third side.
I can complete it.
So it's a much more multifaceted, uh, account of things.
You mentioned people, uh, you went to view... Forster and Russell... ...or now deceased.
Did this liberate you in a sense to be a little bit more?
Yes, I could say more about people who were alive.
I can say this time more about people who were alive then, because although people were very surprisingly generous and brave, let me say, if people came to you when you were older, when you were in your 70s or 80s, and showed you things that you had done, reminded you of things you had done in your teens or twenties,
and said, oh, by the way, I'm going to publish all this for the... You might... You know, it's not easy.
So I will celebrate the bravery, the courage of these people, in a way.
Painters, philosophers, poets.
It's not easy to have a young child coming along.
We always remember, you know, as they say, the forest.
Yes, that's true.
Is this kind of a...
for you a similar kind of thing that you really, this was a first book?
Yeah.
It was something... Maybe there's something there that says, I've got to go back and square this away.
That is absolutely right.
It was... I was both overruled by doing this book, which is... It took me nearly eight years, the same as you have taken over yours.
But the extra two years or three years that I've spent doing this,
has made me able to look at the book again and say, that's it, to say that I've done it sort of honourably now.
Beforehand, I was sort of beginning to slink past the bookshops guiltily.
I was embarrassed by parts of it.
I think it had life.
It wasn't a dead book, but it was a deformed book.
Pretty nice.
That's what I think.
And yet, as you have already pointed out, it was very well received.
It was very well received.
It was still in print.
I had to put it out of print.
I had to buy back the rights.
So you affirm it.
I actually went to my publishers, and you won't get many scenes like this, and said, they said, we're going to do a new edition, a new reprint of it.
And I said, don't.
Put it out of print.
Now...
That's a very strange situation.
Normally you get authors begging them.
Indeed, indeed.
Dr. Oh killed one of his early books in Spain.
Yes, I mean we all... Indeed, indeed.
But this is rather different.
I wanted to resurrect it.
Give it a new life.
Were you thinking about it
about it at all during the night.
You were involved, how long on the shop project?
Fifteen years.
There must have been times when you thought that would never end.
Yes, there were.
It was like a marathon, that shore, in which you're running alone, because, as you know, authors write alone.
How many people they interview, they've got to come back to their desk and do it alone.
The little red light is on, by the way, right?
Yep, it's fine.
No, no, of course.
Um, and I wondered whether in that marathon I had perhaps taken a wrong turning.
And I was running along by myself, still running, a bit out of breath sometimes.
But was I, had I taken a wrong, was I on course?
Was there a winning day, if any were?
So it was, and I was out of touch with the reading public for a long time.
I mean, I did some other things and so on, but this is my main work.
So, but it, the Strachey, which really had, uh, established me as a biographer, um,
and in a way that was very particular since I was writing about a biographer, and a biographer who had, in the early part of this century, revolutionized the art of biography and rescued it from Victorian respectability, shall we say.
So I wanted to carry on that torch, and it niggled me that I'd done it partly, but the torch...
spluttered and gone out a bit and come on and gone off.
I wanted to do it better, just simply better.
Do you believe, as many people do, that major figures like Shaw, like Shakespeare, of course, require a new evaluation, a new biographical look with succeeding generations?
Yes, I do.
That there's no such thing as a definitive life?
I believe this very strongly.
there is no such thing as a divinity of life.
Not in the sense that someone is going to discover a new postcard and therefore have one new fact.
It isn't quite that.
It is that the past is always changing.
The past is changing as we re-evaluate it.
And as we re-evaluate it, the figures in it occupy different positions regarding ourselves.
We can get a relative truth
We may not get an absolute truth.
We can get absolute facts, but even they need interpretation.
And they are much more complicated than we think facts nowadays.
For example, I can say something to you that isn't true, but it is a fact that I've said it.
I can have a dream, but that dream isn't true, but it's a fact that I dreamed it.
I can take a decision on something.
But not 100% of myself takes.
If there's a lingering element, perhaps only 75% of myself took that decision on what to do.
And there's a 25% regret.
And that colors what I do.
So things are much more subtle these days in the way that we evaluate, describe, recreate the past.
Is Strachey the type of individual...
but does he have the stature, you think, that will require constantly evaluation?
Well, I think that he will, really for two reasons.
I think his life was so extraordinary.
Oh, we can certainly say that about Shaw.
Oh, yes, there's no question about Shaw.
Exactly.
The case I would make for Strachey is partly that no biographer writing today, I think, will deny that he...
really changed biography quite profoundly.
And therefore, whether you love him or hate him, honour him or react against him, you have to say that he had a great influence on the writing of life, and by one extension, on life itself.
Partly an essential role in the Bloomsbury Group, which had this philosophy of putting...
Private values over public values.
Human relationships, the ability to recognize beauty in music and art, to place that higher than political careerism and public ambition is a sort of philosophy that is very interesting, I think.
And I think that his story, the story of his life, and the extraordinary love affair with Carrington,
which occupied 16 years of both their lives.
No one interested in human nature can fail to be interested in that story, which, of course, as you possibly know, is now a film.
It's going to open in the Cannes Film Festival later this month.
Ah, it comes from this book, yes, indeed.
No, no, no, this is the book.
Do you get some kind of... Yes, I do, I'm glad to say.
In fact, what has suddenly happened is that film people have woken up to what I would call a fact, but as you know, facts are... to the fact that my work is filmable, because what I try to do is to tell a non-fiction scholarly research
story, narrative, so that you get information, certainly, but you also wish to turn the page about it.
What the hell happens next?
So they're now talking to people who made The Madness of King George, that film, the producer, wants to film my biography of Augustus John, which is coming.
So I now find myself rather late in life,
with a secondary career, which is quite powerful.
I have a chapter in here about this fellow who stole 25,000 rare books from 275 universities all over the United States.
It's a big story.
I went to his trial.
I interviewed him.
He was the only person.
His defense was insanity.
It was a wonderful story.
And the stuff was worth twenty million dollars, and he stole it to keep it, because he loved it.
And he has been approached by a number of people for movies and stuff.
And he doesn't want to do it.
He's still in prison.
But I mean, I've got the whole story here.
That's fascinating, you see.
And I'm wondering, because if it's public record, if they could just take it from me.
This has always been the difficulty.
But there is a case in Britain where
I think it was John Osborne was involved in making a film script of a piece of history that had been written by Cecil Wood of Swift, and they took her book, The Charge of the Light Brigade, it was.
And it was proved that they had based it so closely on her book that she was due... Exactly, the rights.
And in this, I mean, Christopher Hampton, who's done the script,
is happy to acknowledge that and to do a contract.
It's so easy to do, and it's not really a great deal of money.
No, it's having a proper status, and so on.
I think people should.
Writers should behave, whatever genre of writing, properly to be one another.
You mentioned writing scholarly
but nevertheless excessively written non-fiction.
Do you have a sense of biography as literary work?
Yes, I do now.
I think that if I was to describe Strachey as the enfant terrible of modern biography, I would then say that he came to maturity with people like Richard Ellman, George Painter, in the late 1950s.
And that since then, we have been going through a golden age of biography, the second golden age of biography.
The first was with Johnson and Boswell.
And it's a very strange genre.
It's a hybrid, really.
Johnson was a very moralist, of course, and a poet.
And Boswell was a great adventurer and a keeper of a great journal, hence that connection between journalists and biography.
And I see a great deal of good writing, really good writing, by genuine writers now taking place in that form of non-fiction.
And it's been a very exciting time to write biographies now.
And so my favorites, of course, and it just seems that so many of the really fine biographies are about writers.
Yes, they are.
And I wonder why that is.
I don't know.
I think it is this.
I have a theory about it.
Is that a literary biographer invites the subject, who is also a considerable writer normally, to write one more book posthumously and in collaboration.
And, you know, and so that's the past and the present.
And it's so satisfactory if it works.
It's like a good marriage, as it were.
You can't tell if it's going to work.
And there are stories of
people coming together, it seemed to be so promising, and then the love affair turns out.
It's been so much a good way to know.
Yes, it has.
Just in the last year, I mean.
I don't know if you had a chance to read the Balzheimer.
Wonderful book.
It's absolutely a wonderful book.
We just got one in yesterday on Zola, which looks nice.
No, it's the most wonderful time to be writing this, and the benchmark is going up all the time.
It's really very good, I think.
Now, what are you working on next?
Well, I've only just finished that, but I think I shall be doing for Augustus John what I've done for this, because a lot of papers have come to life, which were smuggled out.
So I'm rewriting it.
But I've been asked to write the official biography of Doris Lessing.
But that's probably... Oh, really?
That's probably...
Not my next book, but my last book, and conceivably, for both of us, a Bostemus book.
Well, isn't it interesting?
She said one reason she is writing these memoirs is because she understood that she said she gave the figure five people were working on them.
And she's also now using my name to threaten them with a no.
So things that she cannot... But she said the reason she's doing this is to get it right.
Absolutely.
Well, that's one thing.
There is another point, that you'll get it right up to a point, but there are things that she cannot quite say while she and some other people are alive that she will put in a suitcase or whatever things to one side for me.
I'm sure you'll agree with this.
I think Justin Kaplan and David McCullough as well.
Justin Kaplan, wonderful.
It's great.
And they both said, you know, when you embark on a biography of somebody,
The first thing you want to read is their own autobiographical.
They say, because what they don't say about themselves is very often just as important as what they do say about themselves.
Absolutely.
And very often, I mean, I found this with Shaw, for example, because he was asked to give accounts of himself later in life when he was famous, he would write long letters to people saying, I did this, this, this, and this.
And it's tremendously convincing, and it's readable, and it's
got tremendous power and then you read what he wrote at the time and you see there are differences and so there would be with all of us we edit out things we forget things and so what you want to do is to plot what people wrote at the time with what they wrote later and then sometimes with what people wrote about them or to them and so it's multifaceted again there are many strands to it and if you can weave them together in a pattern
so that they have a sort of resonance and structure.
Then it becomes part of literature because it has an imaginative as well as a factual quality.
Now, you started work as a biographer as a youngster, really.
Yes, indeed, indeed.
That's so unusual, isn't it?
Very unusual, and it came through really a succession of accidents.
Many things do come as a result of accidents, I think.
I really had been, at school I'd studied the sciences, not literature or anything.
But that was my father's idea, because we had no money, and he saw from the advertisements in newspapers that the future lay with structural engineers and so on.
The trouble is I didn't have any gifts for this, especially in mathematics.
And so at a certain stage, I passed some exams.
I said, look, I can't go on with this.
And I argued with him late into the night.
And he suddenly had a brainwave.
He said, look, you can revive the family fortunes by going into the law.
And when you argue each case as passionately as they'll actually pay you for it.
So I then went to study law.
But what I discovered was that I was bored to tears by a lot of law except for criminal law.
Now, criminal law is not interested in law.
It's interested in human beings, in human nature.
So I gave that up.
And then there was the military service in Britain.
So I had to do two years in that.
And I think that persuaded everybody who saw me that I was not a natural soldier, shall we say.
So I was totting up a list of disqualifications.
I was a reader.
And it seemed to me, I'd been brought up largely by grandparents, that a great deal more was happening in other people's lives than in my own, and perhaps a little more successful.
I got more and more interested in people.
And that's really how it came about.
And what I discovered is that a lot of people who become reasonably successful, don't have that easy beginning.
Don't have... It isn't obvious.
Things are...
Well, they would astonish their parents, shall we say.
Now, you're married to a woman who's quite a wonderful novel.
That's true.
And her muse really inspires the imagination.
You haven't been motivated in those areas.
Well, years before I met her, I did write one novel.
Really?
Published?
Yes, published in the States, not in Britain.
What title, might I add?
A Dog's Life.
It was published by Holt in the 60s.
And the fact was that I was sued for libel.
Now, it seemed rather curious that one should be sued for libel for one's fiction, and not so much for one's non-fiction.
And the criticism, really, of me was that my novel was too sort of documentary.
Whereas perhaps my non-fiction reads too much like a story, like a novel.
Was it based on the life of an actor?
Well, it was partly based on my own family.
But although I disguised things, one member of the family said that he was... He assumed by a member of the family?
My father.
But he never took it to the court.
But I think now... Let me say this.
I don't think it was that wonderful a novel, and I think I actually am grateful to it.
So all my desires
to write fiction, have really gone into the narrative devices that I have borrowed from novelists to write non-fiction.
You've got to even borrow things.
I think the biographers these days have stolen some of, or borrowed some of the magic fire, shall we say, of novelists, where novelists go to non-fiction for a lot of their raw material.
So it's a cross-fertilization which is very healthy for literature.
Exactly, exactly.
Because I'm writing for so many more newspapers now than I was when we saw it, a lot of us, some things almost fear.
Ah, yeah, yeah, indeed, indeed, indeed.
I remember you once talked about the working, if you could describe it this way, the working relationship that you have with your wife, that I think that you actually write in different parts of town.
Yes, we do.
We're 20 minutes apart from one another, and one of the reasons for this is that however sympathetic you are to another person,
You create around you while you are writing something like a magnetic field of concentration.
And just to have somebody else on the premises with a completely different magnetic field of concentration means that you are always aware, not in any obvious way, of someone else pounding away at this or doing that.
And it's much better to separate yourself while you're working and then come together together
When you put that, the finals will stop for the day.
Do you look at each other's work?
No, except for under very special circumstances, where it's felt that there's a particular thing that the other person can help with very specifically.
On the whole, you have to worry things out by yourself and get them on the page.
The way that we help one another is by lifting each other's morale.
of suddenly seeing that one person is rather down in the dumps and saying, right, we'll go out and see a film, we'll go out and do this, we'll go away for the weekend, we'll give ourselves more energy.
And that is very helpful, one to another.
Occasionally we will discuss things, but I think it's sometimes dangerous for a writer to discuss a book while that book is in the process of creation, where it's being written.
You have to do it.
That's why it's rather lonely business.
on the page.
I know people who are very gifted, who've talked away their books.
They're extremely entertaining in the evening to have dinner with, and yet the book either doesn't get written or is disappointing.
It's not so good as what you heard.
Look at Truman Capote's book that never was.
Talked about it for all those years.
Very good examples.
That's exactly what I mean.
And then finally, when they looked at it, the sludge of it, nothing here.
Did he actually write anything?
He probably was a very, very, very entertaining program.
And that's, you know... They were scared of it.
People were saying, what's this book?
They couldn't wait to see what we have.
As it turned out, there was nothing there.
Nothing there.
Well, I think we're both very aware of that.
There will be a special circumstances.
There was something when Margaret needed something...
when I was able to give her something from my family, which worked in the plot, just the paper.
What about the technical things?
Yes.
Exactly.
But what is interesting is that Margaret has turned biographer, and she has just completed, this month, a biography of the English novelist Angus Wilson.
And it's going to be a very good book.
But, she said to me,
Never again, biography.
You never told me what hell it was.
And as you and I know, it is hell.
Well, exactly.
I would love to do a biography, actually.
Yeah, yeah.
But I feel that this is almost practice.
Yes, indeed.
What I need is a subject.
You need, yes.
Well, a subject will select you at one third.
Thank you.
They sometimes select you rather than them, you know.
You're the other way around.
You mentioned that you work 20 minutes apart just for... For reasons of... Just give me an idea where... No, no, no.
She's more in Hampstead.
I am in Notting Hill.
And although... These are separate residences, are they?
At the moment, well, they started out as separate residences, yes, because when we married...
she had three children, and she had the Oxford Companion of English Literature, which filled rooms.
I had Shaw, in my play, which I can tell you, well, I don't have to tell you.
And there wasn't sort of a room during the day times.
So we retained those, but she's now selling her place and so on.
But we do work away.
In the old days, she took an hostage.
Do you both work in the daytime?
Yes, we tend to work in the daytime.
She's got a slightly different clock.
She's about an hour earlier than I am, and I work an hour later, but that's not a hymn of that.
I did an interview with John Keegan last fall.
He was quite an interesting guy.
He said a very interesting thing.
When he was writing the things of battle,
You say you almost entered a zone where, where, and, and, you know, you feel this.
Yes, you do.
You can't even remember almost what you're doing, but you're doing it.
And I wonder if it's a similar kind of... Very much so, very much so.
When writing The Strachey, I got so involved in The Strachey-Carrington Love Affair that, um, people who were interested in me were quite jealous of the dead.
I, it really took over my imagination.
In a way, to some extent, it may be a superficial parallel, but a biographer is to some extent like an actor who puts on the clothes of the subject, learns the lines, takes on the part for some of the time, becomes, so far as the audience is concerned, that person for some of the time.
Of course there's the other thing where you have to then take off the clothes and look at the performance and judge it as a critic.
But you do lose yourself, apparently.
And that, to me, is one of the fascinations of Barclay, to take a holiday from oneself.
You know, I think we've done it in an hour.
God, yes, yes, yes.
Well, it's very charming and good to speak to someone who...